Relational Database Management Systems
Now suppose other people in the company are interested in reading the reviews and adding users. Therefore, you decide to share the spreadsheet. Over time, the amount of information starts to increase. You begin to encounter issues with duplicate data, typos, perhaps even formatting issues if multiple people are working on one file. The simple spreadsheet now becomes unwieldy and finding/collecting information requires a lot of scrolling and searching. At this point, you would probably benefit from moving to a relational database management system.

A relational database is a database organized according to the relational model of data. In simple terms, the relational model defines a set of relations (which we can think of as analogous to tables) and describes the relationships, or connections, between them in order to determine how the data stored in them can interact. Using the relational model elevates our database from data that is represented in just a flat, two-dimensional table, to one where we can describe the data in a more complex and detailed way. Using a relational database helps us to cut down on duplicated data and provides a much more useful data structure for us to interact with.

A relational database management system, or RDBMS, is essentially a software application, or system, for managing relational databases. An RDBMS allows a user, or another application, to interact with a database by issuing commands using syntax that conforms to a certain set of conventions or standards.

There are many relational database management systems such as SQLite, MS SQL, PostgreSQL and MySQL. Some are lightweight, easy to install and use, while others are robust, scalable, but are complex to install. These various RDBMSes may vary in certain ways, and some of the commands they use may have slight syntactical differences. One thing they have in common however is the underlying language they all use: SQL.

It is worth noting that the relational model is not the only structured data model used by database software. A program like MongoDB, for example, uses a document-oriented data storage model. This, and other systems using non-relational data storage and retrieval models, are often loosely grouped together under the term 'NoSQL'. For the purposes of this book however, we are only interested in the relational model and how SQL can be used to interact with relational databases.