Why Object Oriented Programming?

This chapter will give you an overall taste of Object Oriented Programming. All of these topics will be covered in more detail in the chapters to come.

Object Oriented Programming, often referred to as OOP, is a programming paradigm that was created to deal with the growing complexity of large software systems. Programmers found out very early on that as applications grew in complexity and size, they became very difficult to maintain. One small change at any point in the program would trigger a ripple effect of errors due to dependencies throughout the entire program.

Programmers needed a way to create containers for data that could be changed and manipulated without affecting the entire program. They needed a way to section off areas of code that performed certain procedures so that their programs could become the interaction of many small parts, as opposed to one massive blob of dependency.

Enter OOP. We'll first introduce some terminology, then dive into examples.

Encapsulation is hiding pieces of functionality and making it unavailable to the rest of the code base. It is a form of data protection, so that data cannot be manipulated or changed without obvious intention. It is what defines the boundaries in your application and allows your code to achieve new levels of complexity. Ruby, like many other OO languages, accomplishes this task by creating objects, and exposing interfaces (i.e., methods) to interact with those objects.

Another benefit of creating objects is that they allow the programmer to think on a new level of abstraction. Objects are represented as real-world nouns and can be given methods that describe the behavior the programmer is trying to represent.

Polymorphism is the ability for different types of data to respond to a common interface. For instance, if we have a method that expects argument objects that have a move method, we can pass it any type of argument, provided it has a compatible move method. The object might represent a human, a cat, a jellyfish, or, conceivably, even a car or train. That is, it lets objects of different types respond to the same method invocation.

"Poly" stands for "many" and "morph" stands for "forms". OOP gives us flexibility in using pre-written code for new purposes.

The concept of inheritance is used in Ruby where a class inherits the behaviors of another class, referred to as the superclass. This gives Ruby programmers the power to define basic classes with large reusability and smaller subclasses for more fine-grained, detailed behaviors.

Another way to apply polymorphic structure to Ruby programs is to use a Module. Modules are similar to classes in that they contain shared behavior. However, you cannot create an object with a module. A module must be mixed in with a class using the include method invocation. This is called a mixin. After mixing in a module, the behaviors declared in that module are available to the class and its objects.

We'll see examples of all the above mentioned terms in action in the following chapters.

